Hi, I'm Jeff Hammond from Intel, and I'll be talking
about “Heterogeneous Parallel Programming
"With Open Standards Using oneAPI and Data Parallel C++”.
slide-2
The motivation for what we're doing here is
that we have an ever-increasing diversity and complexity
in computer architecture.
This has been going on for 20 years or so
with the introduction of multicore and SIMD units,
and obviously GPUs and other forms of accelerators.
And I think as this audience knows, you know,
AI accelerators, special purpose processors
have just exploded over the last few years,
and there's really no indication that
there's gonna be any convergence in architecture or,
or simplification.
We're gonna be dealing with this problem for a while now,
but, and furthermore, even within families
of architectures like GPUs, or, FPGAs,
obviously there are different vendors
and different programming models
and different execution models.
So there's still even within one architectural family,
there's still things that one needs to worry about.
So what we really like to do to solve
at least part of the problem here is come up
with a base software platform that is capable
of working everywhere.
It doesn't work perfectly optimally on every processor.
That's not really possible with a single source code,
but what we'd like to have is
a single software architecture that works
at a whole bunch of places.
And you can start with working code
and then you can go off and tune it
when you need to.
And hopefully you can get a lot of code reuse
and you can focus your effort on performance tuning
when that's important.
slide-3
So what Intel is doing with oneAPI is,
if you look at the left, is the core screen diagram.
Obviously we have applications.
There's millions of those.
And, and many of those applications share middleware
or frameworks; obviously things like TensorFlow
are really well known frameworks.
And then there's OpenMP as, as like middleware,
you know, that people use in high performance computing,
and then, you know, what oneAPI is,
is it's trying to be an industry initiative
that, that of course Intel will productize,
but it's an open standard specification
for a set of things that will live
in the area between the frameworks
and the middleware and a variety of different architectures.
So we, Intel, make CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs and AI processors,
and so there's a, there's a even within our company,
there's a big scope of architectures.
And obviously in the greater Silicon ecosystem,
there's just a tremendous amount of stuff
that could be, could be the bottom of this stack.
Now, if we look at the details,
what oneAPI industry specification is trying to do is,
is address at least two problems,
one of which is direct programming.
So for that, we have something called Data Parallel C++,
which I'll explain in just a second.
And then we have API based programming.
Of course, that's the sort of libraries
that people are used to.
So if you're used to AI programming,
you're probably not writing a great deal of direct code.
You're using a framework; you might be using Python.
You might be calling  a deep learning library
or a data analytics library.
There's a lot of middleware
that gets reused in this space.
And it's important to standardize,
have open standards for both of these things,
because we, you know, if you only have
direct programming standards, well,
then fine, you either have to write it all yourself,
or you have to write some code that might be standard,
and then couple it to a whole bunch
of nonstandard libraries.
And it doesn't really address the problem.
You're not gonna get, you know,
an out of the box working code on a new platform
if none of the library APIs are standard.
slide-4
So Khronos SYCL 2020
is the heterogeneous parallel programming standard
that Data Parallel C++  is building off of.
So the Data Parallel C++ compiler is, is Clang-based.
It's open source.
It's obviously implementing ISO C++
'cause that's what Clang does.
And then, you know, we're working on SYCL support.
So SYCL 2020 is a provisional specification
that, you know, is being worked on this year.
So hopefully it'll be, you know,
polished by the end of the year.
And it builds on SYCL 1.2.1,
which is the prior standard that's out there already.
And Intel worked with the SYCL community
to implement a number of new features
that are going into SYCL 2020
that are important for usability.
These things like unified shared memory,
which is a, you know, pointer base memory management,
which was requested by a lot of users.
Reductions are important for a lot of workloads.
Subgroups are something
that help you do more performance tuning.
And then in-order queues was a convenience feature
for people that had codes that just mapped naturally
onto those instead of out of order queues.
So Intel is gonna continue to work with the SYCL community
to bring additional features.
Obviously we want to see everybody else contribute as well,
but we're working with the SYCL community as a way
to develop a heterogeneous programming language
that's standard and not proprietary and not closed source.
So you can go to GitHub and you can see,
you know, this is the work in progress.
This the upstreaming part of this,
which we've, we've talked about with the LVM community,
but our compiler is on GitHub
and the extensions that we were building last year
prior to standardization for SYCL were documented there.
And, and of course, then we helped contribute them
to the Khronos SYCL provisional spec.
slide-5
So why SYCL?
So OpenCL, which is, you know, sort of an ancestor to SYCL,
it has a well-defined portable execution model,
which is really important.
Obviously you wanna start with something
that has a portable concept in it,
but a lot of application programmers find it too verbose.
And unfortunately, you know,
that verbosity might've been addressed by middleware,
you know, using OpenCL as a compiler target,
but the fact is that didn't really happen, unfortunately.
And even if there was an OpenCL ecosystem,
there's still people that wanna write sort of
to the direct language
and OpenCL just doesn't have the modern C++ support
that a lot of programmers are looking for.
And so SYCL is based on modern C++.
It starts, you know, clean
with a C++11 view of the world.
It uses things like Lambdas as, as a very, you know,
important central concept.
And it uses those features to have
a single source heterogeneous programming model.
So you can, you know, read top to bottom
even if your code might be going off an accelerator.
It's really nice to not have
that heterogeneous offloaded kernel be in a string
or some separate file or some separate function.
You can actually read top to bottom; it's kinda nice.
And SYCL parallelism, if you have never seen it before,
it looks like Intel's thread building blocks
or C++ Parallel STL.
It looks like some other things too,
but it, it's explicit in its control
over the hardware resources.
So you say, "Hey, I wanna run a CPU,"
or, "Hey, I wanna run a GPU."
You can obviously pick the default device,
and that's gonna work well, too,
but in some of these complex heterogeneous systems,
you really wanna have explicit control
over all your hardware resources.
slide-6
And SYCL is really the first standard programming model
designed to address this problem.
So there's things like Cocos and RAJA
from some of the Department of Energy labs,
which are trying to address heterogeneous programming
and they're open source and they're portable
and that's fantastic,
but there's also some value in having a standard
that can have a bunch of different implementations.
And so that's where SYCL is different.
It's an industry standard that is designed
to be implemented a bunch of different times
as opposed to a standard open source distribution,
which also works for other projects.
slide-7
So the SYCL ecosystem, as of, you know,
a month or so ago: there are four well known compilers
that are relatively complete.
So the Intel Data Parallel C++ family is,
you know, the open source version.
Then we obviously productize that.
The open source version has contributions from Codeplay
to support Nvidia back-end.
And our compiler will support OpenCL SPIR-V back-end
so whether or not those are Intel devices.
I personally worked on a little bit of stuff
with our importing.
It's not done yet, but, but there's clearly
the opportunity to run this across a wide range of devices,
not just Intel's hardware.
So Codeplay has their own implementation called ComputeCpp.
They have a free community edition, which is great,
and I use all the time and then they have
a commercial product, if that's something you need.
And they support a wide range of hardware,
including OpenCL SPIR-V back-ends,
as well as they support Nvidia.
So Xilinx Research has something called triSYCL,
which is open source.
I use it on my laptop all the time.
It's not a compiler.
It's actually header based, uses Boost,
and, and a lot of modern C++,  and therefore,
it'll, you know, pretty much work anywhere
where you can get a modern C++ compiler and Boost.
And, and they, I don't own any Xilinx FPGAs,
but they have some interest in that.
And, I don't know how it works, so hopefully it does.
So hipSYCL is the last major implementation.
So this comes from the University of Heidelberg,
and sort of, it's in the name
that it supports HIP,
which is AMD GPU
compiler back-end, and it also supports CUDA,
and they have an OpenMP support.
So if you look across all of these
four different compiler implementations,
what you see is CPU support, GPU support,
and FPGA support across a lot of different vendors.
And so there's a really rich ecosystem out there
that people can use.
slide-8
So it's natural to ask, you know, how well does SYCL work?
Is it, is it actually fulfilling any of this promise
of working  well on multiple devices?
So Tom Deakin and Simon McIntosh-Smith
from the University of Bristol have written a paper.
There's a video of them on YouTube
and the code is on GitHub, so you can check it all out.
I'm not gonna go into any details other than for,
you know, bandwidth limited workload,
they showed that they can get performance portability
with SYCL across all three GPUs from Intel, Nvidia and AMD.
There's a little bit of a bug
in the Xeon OpenCL implementation
that'll be fixed.
So that's really an artifact
of a measurement, but this shows
that you can get performance portability
with SYCL relative to whether it's CUDA or HIP.
slide-9
So this is another measurement
of performance portability in SYCL by Argonne,
Brian Homerding and John Tramm.
And again, you can find all the details online.
This is, I think, really interesting, 'cause it shows,
if you look at the axis here,
you've got winners on both sides of the axis.
So obviously in some limit you can always make a
nonportable proprietary language
work better than a portable one, because you can always use,
you know, all the features plus some,
some nonportable ones,
but at least in the code that is in
the RAJAPerf test suite,
there are examples of code that works better
with SYCL and better with CUDA.
So this shows that, you know,
depending on how you write the code and how much effort,
how much you tune it, et cetera,
you might find that you can get
better performance with a standard,
you're not necessarily compromising.
slide-10
The other thing about oneAPI that's important is
it's not just about the code that you're writing.
You also wanna have libraries and frameworks supported.
So, you know, the left is an actual news story
that I found amusing.
And the thing on the right is, of course, I made up,
but just to make the point that
it's really fantastic  to outsource your programming
of high performance code to libraries
and focus on what you actually wanna do,
whether it's AI or science or who knows what.
slide-11
So the oneAPI libraries that exist,
there's one for, you know, C++ data parallelism
through SYCL, which is really the standard library support.
Math library, deep learning library, some other stuff
for AI data analytics, video.
You can find all the details online
at the link you'll see on the next slide.
slide-12
So if you wanna learn more about oneAPI, there's oneapi.com.
It has the specifications.
Then there's the product implementation.
If you're using Linux, you can get it a whole bunch
of different ways: package managers, Docker,
binaries, installers.
That also supports Windows.
If you don't wanna do anything to your computer,
you can sign up for a DevCloud account,
account that tries CPU, GPU, and FPGA hardware there.
So you don't even have to buy or set up an FPGA,
if you've always wanted to try high level synthesis
on that with SYCL.
So there's some links down below.
The first one is a super simple tutorial I wrote
all the way working up to a complex,
reverse time migration application.
And you can check that stuff out,
'cause it's all in GitHub.